Luis Moreno comple thank you so much for
joining us on up
front my pleasure my he very frustrating
what happened hamas's October 7th attack
and Israel's subsequent bombardment of
Gaza uh have both been met with
accusations of genocide and ethnic
cleansing and various other war crimes
uh but before we get into the specifics
of these accusations I wanted to ask you
if you could first sort of briefly
Define what constitutes a war
crime well War crime are basically
defined by the Geneva Convention and now
by the Roman statute and they basically
they are limits how soldiers could
behave during a war that is a war crime
then you have another type of crimes
crimes against humanity and genocide
crimes against humanity is a widespread
or systematic attack against the
civilian population and that why
the
the Hamas attack is a crimes against
humanity but in addition you have a
specific crime genocide genocide is an
attack is a crime to destroy an EIC
religious or russal group and I
believe that's important because the
genocide is a
convention and is the convention
requiring the states part is to prevent
genocide that's why genocide is so
important because it's the only crime of
these crimes that they have this
obligation not just for not to commit
the crimes there are 153 States parties
of the genocide convention including us
and Russia and all almost all of the
countries uh who are committed to
prevent and panish genocide that's why
genocide is so important uh how about
ethnic cleansing uh some some people
have argued that what's happening in Gaz
is ethnic cleansing how do you define
that ethnic cleansing ethnic cleansing
like a poem it's a poem ethnic cleansing
is a nice expression but it's not a
crime itself any cleansing is a warning
used to avoid to define something as
genocide why because if you if you a
state if you are us and you say it's a
genocide you have the duty to prevent if
you say is that any cleansing nothing
happen okay so let's let's talk about
this idea of genocide um according to
Palestinian Health officials as of this
recording uh Israel has killed over
15,000 Palestinians around 40% of that
number are children uh they've bombed
hospitals schools uh refugee camps uh
Israeli Army spokesperson Daniel hagari
in fact openly admitted that the quote
emphasis is on damage and not on
accuracy and of course this is all in
addition to Israel preventing ending
nearly all food from coming in all fuel
from coming in uh people argue that this
is a form of collective punishment uh my
question is is there an actual genocide
taking
place well let me
summarize the standard should be
reasonable based to believe it's very
low we are not in a court of justice
it's we understanding if I am persecutor
I start investigation when there are
reasonal basic to believe in the Hamas
Israel conflict you have Hamas
committing war crimes including today
the hostages is a war crime crimes
against humanity and the the crimes
committed on October 7 in Israel and
probably genocide because hmer has
intention to destroy Israelis as a group
then Israel reaction is also included
many crimes it's complicate to identify
the world crimes because each bombing
need to be evaluated but there is
something very clear
the siege of Gaza itself that is
extermination or persecution as a crime
against humanity and is a form of
genocide article 6 C or 2 C in the
genocide convention defin that you don't
need to kill people to commit genocide
the the the rule say inflicting
conditions to destroy the group that
itself is a genocide so creating The
Siege itself self is a genocide and that
is very clear the Israel won The Siege
is very clear and the intentions to
destroy the people many officers from
the Israel government are expressing
genocidal intentions that why it's leasy
to say and the reasonable Bas to believe
Israel is committing a genocide in Gaza
just on the siege then each bombing each
of the killings should be properly
investigated but come on we have already
cleared The Siege itself is a genocide
and that why this fire should not
transform in a new genocide please you
you talked about Hamas also uh being
engaged in war crimes uh of course on
October 7th they killed hundreds of
Israeli civilians at a music festival
they've also kidnapped civilians these
included babies children the elderly the
disabled I mean we can agree that Prima
fascia those are war crimes no exactly
Hamas October 7 is clearly a war crime
you're attacking civilians it's a crime
against humanity because it's a it's a
it's a plan attack against civilian
population and it's a genocide because
the killings were intended to destroy
Israeli group and that's the genocide
and that why the October 7 attack is a
war crime is against humanity and a
genocide and reason Bas you say could
you say a bit more about why this
constitutes a genocide I mean some
people have argued that they are engaged
in an act of resistance intended not to
destroy Jewish people as an ethnicity
nationality or race but to defeat a
nation state that is attempting to
occupy them they're defeating an
occupying power well I am influenced
because when I was a prosecutor I was
involed for three years in the Palestine
Israel conflict that why it's for me so
painful to see what happened today
because in those days we have hopes and
I remember hamama sent to me a professor
working with them and he explained to me
that Hamas believed Jewish people should
not be in Palestine it's not just about
protecting Gaza Hamas believe there
should be no Jews in in in Palestine
that why for them killing the the Jews
in in Israel is is is part of the
strategy and and that I'm sorry it's a
genocide because it's a it's a it's a
it's an attack taking trying to destroy
a group in this case the Israelis in
Palestine okay uh the Hamas Charter uh
was updated as you know in 2017 this is
an update from the 1988 Charter uh and
in it uh they explicitly State uh Hamas
affirms that its conflict is with the
Zionist project not with the Jews
because of their religion Hamas does not
w a struggle against the Jews because
they are Jewish but wage is a struggle
against the zionists who occupy
Palestine I'm not here to argue whether
that's true or not but if we were to
assume that that were true for a moment
would that then nullify the argument of
genocide as a legal matter well as I say
I am using as a standard the the
standard is not so high it's reasonable
based to believe that's a standard to
start an investigation and according
with that standard for me the genocide
should be investigated in the case of
Hamas and maybe they adjusted and maybe
they they now are not trying to do that
but this event sound that they want to
to kill these people to remove the to
expel the the Israeli people from the
land so that is for
me that provide reason Bas to believe
that a genocide I'm not saying it's a
conviction because that's the point to
convict one of the Hamas leader for
genocide you need a proper trial you
need to offer the Hamas leader the
opportunity to explain his arguments and
present evidence and then the judges to
convict a person will have a higher
standard they had to go to Beyond res
doubt standard it's high standard that
why I'm talking about one of the things
I've also been wondering about is
Palestine is a member of the ICC uh
Hamas could be prosecuted for war crimes
uh
under that premise uh Israel however is
not a signatory uh to the IC and it has
not ratified the Rome statute so what
jurisdiction does the IC have to
investigate and or prosecute Israel well
the international criminal court has
jurisdiction in Gaza West Bank and East
Jerusalem that was a long process
started in my time and ended in 2021 the
court accepted that Court the
investigation have have to investigate
crimes committed in Gaza West Bank and
East Jerusalem that mean any crime
committed in this places for any person
could be mitigated by the international
criminal court that's why Israel
committing crimes in gasa could be
investigated by criminal court and I
would suggest for
me even so important What's happen in
Gaza which is massive is what happen in
West Bank because West Bank it has more
influence the Min of security of Israel
and I'm shocked that this man is min of
security the person with me of security
is
today Israel Armed Forces rejected him
as a soldier because he was an extremist
he a man who was investigated convicted
for hate so this man an extremist
settler is providing weapon to settlers
and and running activities in West Bank
fueling the G that's why for for me in
the same way is so appealing and and
awful what happened in Gaza it's
incredible that in in West Bank there's
no more violent because this person the
me of security has influence there is
providing weapons to settlers and in
fact there are almost I understand more
than 200 people killed so that why for
me Gaza is one awful scenario but West
Bank is also very important and you have
to understand should he in particular be
investigating should itamar bin gavier
in particular be investigated for for
war crimes Mr G should be investigated
absolutely yes on on what he's doing
providing weapon to sers is he inciting
sett to violence I I read that he he was
using the police to to crash the meeting
of the family meeting with those who
were liberated from jail and also the
the incarceration there are now people
incarcerated in in bank so all these
activities should be mitigated and
prevented and stop it in March 2023 the
ICC issued an arrest warrant for Russian
President Vladimir Putin Russia however
is not a signatory to the court and
aside from the warrant restricting
Putin's travel to countries that are
signatories he's basically faced no
consequences so can the ICC really do
anything to prosecute non-members can
anything actually be
enforced well you got to understand the
enforcement of the core decisions of the
international coure decision H is in the
hands of the states so President Putin
was indicted and no no one is actively
trying to arrest him but he could not he
had to stop Flying to South Africa or
going to Brazil because Brazil and South
Africa could arrest him and in fact that
happened with president bashid when I
indied president bashid for General side
H he went to South Africa to show his
free but he had to escape because the
judge from South Africa order to arrest
him so there arresting is the most
complicated thing but answer your first
question was can I investigate W Bank
crimes absolutely
yes can indict people absolutely yes
arresting is a different matter but my
point is I is doing what it should do
and it's very important but criminal law
is the last resour should not be the
first resour so what I what I I feel we
are lacking is the commitment of the
International Community including the
bigger states to respect make Israel and
hamama to respect the law look since
September the UN advisor on prevention
of genocide is alerting about five
genocide ongoing in two months so that
why the problem is today the state the
states are not respecting the legal
boundaries and we will kill civilization
we are not just killing individuals in
Gaza or in West Bank or in in in Armenia
we are killing civilization and that why
it's not just about Israelis or
Armenians or theur people or TIG people
in Ethiopia or rohinga in in Myanmar
it's about civilization we are going to
catastrophe so it's time to change the
game and we need leaders not just
prosecutors or judges Luis Moreno compo
thank you so much for joining me on up
front thank you
to